# MOBSTER

MOBSTER is a package to provide a model-based clustering approach to subclonal deconvolution.

The package integrates evolutionary theory and Machine-Learning to analyze bulk sequencing data of a cancer biopsy - ideally, high-resolution whole-genome sequencing data (WGS >100x). 

A dedicated package - mvMOBSTER - provides functions to analyse multi-biopsy data (multi-region, or longitudinal).
- mvMOBSTER: https://github.com/caravagn/mvMOBSTER

Statistical Model
-----------------
MOBSTER implements a `K+1`-dimensional Dirichlet mixture model integrating 1) the theoretical distributions predicted by population genetics - modelling clonal dynamics, the model - with 2) Beta distributions that capture positive selection  - peaks generated by non-neutral clonal expansions in the allele frequency spectrum.

The model has `K>0` Beta and 1 Pareto component, and can reconstruct the clonal architecture of a tumour (subclonal deconvolution) integrating evolutionary theory and Machine-Learning. 

Motivation
----------
The `K` Beta random variables model potential subclones detectable through the Variant allele Frequency (VAF) distribution, and the Pareto random variable models a power law tail - predicted by population genetics - to describe alleles under neutral evolution (within-clone dynamics). 

Features
--------

MOBSTER fits can be computed via moment-matching or maximum-likelihood, and model selection can be done with several likelihood-based scores (BIC, ICL and reICL, a new reduced-entropy variation to ICL). S3 objects allow easy visualization of the data, the fits and the quality of the model. Parametric and nonparametric bootstrap routines are available.

***
**Author:** [Giulio Caravagna](https://sites.google.com/site/giuliocaravagna/), _Institute of Cancer Research, UK_.

**Contact:** [[@gcaravagna](https://twitter.com/gcaravagna); [giulio.caravagna@icr.ac.uk](mailto:giulio.caravagna@icr.ac.uk)]






